

Abstract

Reductions in spoken language complexity have been associated with the onset of various 
neurological disorders. The objective of this study is to analyze whether similar trends are found in 
professional football players who are at risk for chronic traumatic encephalopathy. We compare 
changes in linguistic complexity (as indexed by the type-to-token ratio and lexical density) 
measured from the interview transcripts of players in the National Football League (NFL) to those 
measured from interview transcripts of coaches and/or front-office NFL executives who have 
never played professional football. A multilevel mixed model analysis reveals that exposure to the 
high-impact sport (vs no exposure) was associated with an overall decline in language complexity 
scores over time. This trend persists even after controlling for age as a potential confound. The 
results set the stage for a prospective study to test the hypothesis that language complexity decline 
is a harbinger of chronic traumatic encephalopathy.

Keywords

chronic traumatic encephalopathy; linguistic complexity; natural language processing; type-to-
token ratio; lexical density

Corresponding author: Visar Berisha, PhD, Department of Speech and Hearing Science, School of Electrical Computer and Energy 
Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85284, Phone: (480) 727 – 6455, Fax: (480) 965 – 8516, visar@asu.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


Repeated mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), as experienced by professional athletes in 
high-impact sports, has been associated with an increased risk of developing chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) [1]. CTE is a progressive degeneration of brain tissue 
characterized by abnormal buildup of tau protein in neurons and glial cells [2]. A conclusive 
diagnosis of CTE can be made only through post-mortem evaluation of p-tau deposits in the 
brain since behavioral manifestations of the disease overlap with other neurodegenerative 
disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease [2, 3].

The clinical presentation of CTE is diffuse and variable, but commonly includes disruptions 
in mood or behavior, cognitive decline, and/or motor impairments (see [3], for a review). In 
a review of 51 confirmed cases of CTE in athletes, McKee et al. find that one-third of the 
individuals were symptomatic when they retired from their sport and one-half showed signs 
of CTE within 4 years of retirement [2]. Early and mild manifestations of these symptoms 
may exist unrecognized for years, masked by compensatory strategies or attributed to other 
etiologies or general personality traits. Yet early identification of probable CTE is critical for 
the development and testing of neuroprotective interventions. Fortunately, these subtle 
deficits can be revealed when pressure is exerted on cognitive resources.

The production of language, in the form of conversation or spontaneous written narrative, is 
a form of pressure on cognitive resources. It requires identifying words to express an idea, 
arranging these words in an order allowed by the language, all before initiating the 
articulatory muscles to even produce the speech, or fine motor control to write. As a result, a 
number of studies have demonstrated reductions in linguistic complexity of spoken and 
written discourse in patient populations with cognitive impairment and dementia [4–7]. Our 
study is an extension of this work to a pre-symptomatic population at risk for CTE: players 
in the National Football League (NFL). We have compiled an extensive corpus of over 
10,000 interviews with 10 NFL players (P), 9 of whom were on active rosters in the NFL as 
of the start of the 2016 season, and 18 NFL front office executives and coaches (C) who 
have never played professional football. This provides a rich and unique opportunity to 
evaluate longitudinal changes in language use for both groups (players and coaches/front-
office executives) and to explore whether lexical complexity measures, derived 
automatically from interview transcripts and tracked longitudinally, exhibit any decline.

There are a number of measures to estimate language complexity in the literature. These 
have been used to track second-language learning [13], child language development [26], 
and neurological health [4–10, 22–25]. Because this is an observational study, we focus on 
two simple, but robust, lexical complexity measures that have been established in other 
studies as potential markers of cognitive decline [10, 14, 21]: 1) lexical density (LD) – the 
ratio of the number of content words (verbs, nouns, adjectives, adverbs) to the total number 
of words in the text [13]; 2) type-to-token ratio (TTR) - a ratio of the number of unique 
words in a text to the total number of words in the text. Qualitatively, the LD captures the 
density of ideas in a text and the TTR is a proxy measure for an individual’s working 
vocabulary. Snowdon et al. related idea density in writing with cognitive health later in life 
[7]. Roark et al. showed that the Content Density (a measure very similar to the LD used 



here) was a strong predictor of mild cognitive impairment [4]. Similarly, the TTR has been 
used extensively by researchers as an analysis measure in a variety of clinical populations, 
including to assess linguistic differences between people with dementia associated with 
Alzheimer’s and healthy controls [22], to measure lexical diversity in aphasics [24], to 
assess the extent of lesions on speech production [25], and as a measure of linguistic 
diversity in preschool age children with language impairments [26]. In our study we analyze 
longitudinal change in TTR and LD separately and compared between groups (players and 
coaches/front-office executives) using a multilevel mixed model approach.

Results

In Table 1 we provide a list of individuals included in the study and summary statistics: the 
age (as of the date of the first interview), the number of years of college education, and, for 
the players, their position on the field, the number of years in the NFL (as of the date of the 
first interview), and the average number of times sacked per game (for the quarterbacks). An 
independent-samples t-test was conducted to evaluate differences in college education levels 
and in age between the two groups. There was no significant difference in college education 
between the two groups; t(26)=1.30, p=0.21. However, the C group mean age was 
significantly higher than that of the P group; t(26)=6.53, p<0.0001. For the C group, there 
was a positive correlation for LD with age [r=0.104, p<0.001]. For the P group, there was a 
negative correlation for TTR with age [r=−0.425, p<.001] and with number of years played 
[r=−0.310, p<0.001].

In Table 2, we show the results of the mixed effects model. The analysis indicate that, 
compared to the coach/executive group, player status was associated with an overall decline 
in the TTR and LD scores over time. For TTR, there was a statistically significant decline 
over time [beta (SE): −0.016 (±0.002) points; punadj=0.012]. The effect size increased 
[−0.027 (±0.003) points] after (padj<0.001) adjusting for a potential confound (age at the 
time of first transcript). For LD, the decrease [−0.004 (±0.002) points] over time was 
statistically significant after controlling for age (p=0.012) but not prior to [0.002 (±0.001); 
p=0.166].

In Figure 1, we show the slopes of the unadjusted model for the two complexity parameters 
plotted by group. Note that these measures represent the change in the complexity 
parameters over time and not their absolute values. A positive value indicates an increase in 
language complexity over time, whereas a negative value indicates a decrease in complexity 
over time. It is clear from the plot that there is a distinct difference in the trend exhibited by 
the two groups. For the P group, 70% of the individuals exhibited either a decline in LD or 
in TTR, and 40% exhibited a decline in both. For the C group, 44% of the individuals 
exhibited a decline in either parameter with 28% exhibiting a decline in both. As these 
figures show, this effect is more pronounced when only considering large negative changes 
in the language parameters (e.g. slopes < −0.0001).

To visualize data from individual subjects, Figure 2 shows the TTR and LD plotted over 
time for two individuals – a coach and a player from the same team during the same period. 
We also show the line of best fit with 95% confidence bounds for each figure. The line was 
fit by converting the date to the number of days passed since 1/1/2005. These plots serve as 
exemplars indicative of the larger trend exhibited by the data. As the figure shows, both 
measures for the player exhibit a subtle decline over time; for the coach, the same 
parameters are increasing over time. While there are clear longitudinal trends in the plots, 
there is also a great deal of local variability. This is to be expected. Extensive work in the 
variables influencing intra-speaker variation suggest that any level of language, be it 
phonological, phonetics, syntax, morphology, may be subject to both conscious/explicit and 
completely unconscious/subtle variation within a speaker, as conditioned by pragmatics, 
style-shifting, or register shifting [27, 28].

In Figure 3, we plot the LD slopes against the number of sacks/game [r=−0.740, p=0.057] 
and the TTR slopes against the number of sacks/game [r=−0.630, p=0.131] for the 
quarterbacks in the study. Neither result reached statistical significance, and additional data 
are required to determine whether the inverse trend between sacks/game and language 
decline holds.

Discussion

Despite the limitations inherent in a retrospective observational study, the finding of lexical 
complexity decline in these NFL players is remarkable. Numerous studies have shown that 
throughout adulthood, lexical complexity measures in neurologically healthy people remain 
stable or even increase with age [11, 12]. For instance, it has been demonstrated that 
vocabulary increases over the lifespan [29]. Kemper and Sumner have demonstrated that 
diversity and sophistication of lexical use increases with age [30]. Another study identifies 
age-related increases in lexical complexity and vocabulary at the discourse level [31]. This 
means that, while the mean age of the P group was significantly lower than the C group at 
the time of the first interview, there is no reason to expect a decline in linguistic complexity 
for healthy younger controls.

It is only with advanced age or neurological disease or injury that we would expect 
decreases in the diversity and complexity of language when the cognitive-linguistic system 
is taxed [8–12]. Reductions in the lexical complexity of spoken and written discourse have 
been demonstrated in numerous studies of cognitive impairment and dementia [5–7]. This 
work dates back to Snowdon’s et al. “Nun Study”, which revealed that idea density and 
grammatical complexity in writings early in life were related to cognitive health later in life 
[7]. Other studies have reported other forms of simplification, such as an over-reliance on 
the use of common phrases, non-specific indefinite nouns (e.g., thing), and high frequency/
low-imageability verbs, and smaller vocabulary size [8–10]. Against this backdrop, a finding 
of reduced lexical complexity in the P group warrants follow-up for cause.

There is reason to suspect that the changes we observe are due to exposure to the high-
impact sport. The lexical complexity reductions for the majority of the NFL players sampled 
here is in keeping with results of other studies that have evaluated cognitive-linguistic 
function following mTBI. Relevant to the results of the current analyses, higher order 
linguistic processes such as lexical access, verbal fluency, verbal memory, as well as non-
literal expression, and complex auditory comprehension have all been shown to be adversely 



affected by the occurrence of mTBI [8, 9, 32]. Additionally, it has been shown that discourse 
and narrative abilities [16, 17], pragmatic ability [19], and performance in naming tasks [20] 
decline in the event of mTBI. Supportive cognitive abilities such as memory are also 
adversely affected by mTBI and tasks requiring recall, organization, making inferences, and 
perception/discrimination all are shown to be affected [17, 18]. In addition, auxiliary 
analysis in our study reveals a relationship between the magnitude of change in TTR and LD 
and the number of hits a player experiences per game. To study this relationship, we focus 
on the 7 quarterbacks in our study. For this sub-group, we can approximate the frequency of 
hits they experience by estimating the average number of times per game that they are 
sacked by the opposing team. In Figure 3, we show how the LD and TTR slopes vary with 
the number of sacks/game for the quarterbacks in the study. While this analysis does not 
yield statistically significant results, there seems to be an inverse trend between lexical 
complexity and the number of sacks per game: QBs with fewer sacks per game exhibit less 
pronounced decline. These negative correlations are at least partially driven by the QB with 
an especially high sacks/game measure and additional data from more subjects are required 
before a relationship between these variables is confirmed. However, taken together, these 
results and the existing knowledge base set the stage for a prospective study to test the 
hypothesis that language complexity decline is a harbinger of CTE.

A prospective study to test this hypothesis would allow for control over variables that may 
have influenced the present results. It would be preferable to compare P to an age-matched 
control group for longitudinal comparison in order to establish the healthy gradient for 
increased linguistic complexity over time in this population. Cognitive and functional 
impairments due to drug use (elicit abuse or prescriptions to manage known injuries or 
conditions) may be a possible confound in the subject group; as such, the study should 
attempt to account for these variables. Furthermore, such a study should match baseline 
language scores to ensure similar linguistic starting points across individuals. Ideally, we 
would establish baselines for an incoming rookie class and follow them longitudinally over 
many years. A prospective study in these populations should use question sets that are 
designed to elicit high complexity responses. Such questions would offer the additional 
advantage of placing greater cognitive-linguistic pressure on the participants to reveal 
smaller and/or earlier declines and would not be influenced by any prior media training. 
Furthermore, for all participants in the P group, the study should quantify the severity and 
frequency of hits in practice and during games. Finally, a careful power analysis should be 
conducted to determine the sample size prior to conducting the study. For the current study, 
a post-hoc power analysis using a repeated measures study design indicated that the detected 
effect size for TTR had greater than 80% power whereas there was suboptimal power to 
detect a statistically significant effect size for the LD score. Our reported effect size for LD 
was much smaller than that for TTR; for small differences, a larger sample size is necessary 
to achieve statistical significance.

Without an in vivo marker of CTE, no study can conclude a causal relationship between the 
neural degeneration and clinical presentation during life. However, the data reveal trends for 
players that deserve causal explanation through prospective research designs. If it is found 
that declines in linguistic complexity are a marker of CTE, or track with other markers of 
CTE, this method offers a non-invasive and low cost solution. While the acquisition of 



longitudinal spontaneous speech samples is difficult retrospectively, prospective collection is 
a trivial matter with the proliferation of mobile devices and smartphones. Longitudinal 
behavioral studies aiming to identify early biomarkers of CTE or to distinguish between 
CTE and other tauopathies should also consider linguistic complexity as a sensitive 
component.

Methods

Data

Our study leveraged existing data, in the form of press conference transcripts, to 
quantitatively assess longitudinal changes in linguistic complexity in active NFL players. A 
subset of NFL teams makes publicly available interview transcripts from players and other 
team personnel (see the list teams in the Appendix). We collected these transcripts from 10 
players and 18 coaches or front-office executives who have never played in the NFL.

Two aspects of these press conference transcripts are critical for the present analysis. First, 
the interviews are available over an extended period, allowing us to detect subtle within-
person longitudinal changes in lexical complexity measures should they occur. Second, the 
interview format is non-scripted and spontaneous. This places the interviewee in the 
challenging position of needing to generate verbal responses that are appropriate and timely. 
With cognitive resources taxed, we would expect to see lexical complexity reductions to 
meet the interview timing demands, in the context of pathology or other mitigating 
circumstances [10]. Thus, the press conference transcripts provided the opportunity to track 
the longitudinal lexical complexity of NFL players at risk for CTE. We compare these 
changes against other individuals in the same setting but who have never played professional 
football, namely a group of NFL coaches and executives, for whom we were able to collect 
similar data.

We sampled a database of over 10,000 transcripts from press conference interviews, dating 
from 2007 to 2015. Each interview is date-stamped and consists of a spontaneous interaction 
between members of the press and each player (P) or executive or coach (C). The nature of 
the interviews is similar since the vast majority (>90%) come from either pre-game or post-
game interviews. Thus, there is a great deal of overlap in the types of questions asked by the 
media. For the analysis, we focused only on the responses to the interviewer questions and 
generated a date-stamped concatenated longitudinal database of responses for each 
individual P or C. The details of the processing can be found in the data description in the 
Appendix.

Lexical Complexity Measures

From this merged data source, we analyzed two lexical complexity measures that have been 
shown to robustly change with cognitive decline [10, 14, 21]: 1) the type-to-token ratio 
(TTR) - a ratio of the number of unique words in a text to the total number of words in the 
text; 2) lexical density (LD) – the ratio of the number of content words (verbs, nouns, 
adjectives, adverbs) to the total number of words in the text [13]. The lexical complexity 
measures are dependent on the length of the analyzed transcripts [14]; as a result, we 



adopted a fixed window length of 1000 words. From the concatenated transcripts of each 
person, we swept this 1000-word analysis window through the entire transcript and extracted 
the TTR and the LD [22]. This yielded a date-stamped list of lexical complexity measures. 
Prior to analysis, variability in the data was reduced by averaging LD and TTR parameters 
with the same date stamp.

Other variables

For every individual in the study, we used a combination of sources on the Internet to 
calculate their age. We did the same to find information regarding education levels. The 
number of years played in the NFL was calculated by comparing the date of the first 
transcript to the date they were drafted. The number of sacks per game was estimated as the 
total number of sacks1 divided by the number of games played.

Statistical Analysis

Linear regression analysis used a multilevel mixed model approach to examine the effect of 
exposure to high impact (player) [versus no exposure (coach/executives)] on the outcome 
TTR and LD scores. The model relied upon an autoregressive correlation structure and 
robust estimation of variance. For TTR and LD, separate models were constructed with the 
fixed effects of group (player vs front-office personnel), transcript number (time variable), 
and group-by-transcript number interaction and subject; and intercept as the random effect. 
The variable transcript number was centered on its mean. The working correlation structure 
for the within-subject repeated measurements was selected based on the lowest Akaike’s 
Information Criteria. The regression estimates were adjusted for potential confounders: 
subject age at the time of the first transcript (all subjects). The slope estimates, interpreted as 
the average effect of high impact sports (players) on TTR and LD over time, are presented as 
the beta with standard error (±SE). The Pearson correlation coefficient between model 
slopes and the number of sacks/game was calculated for the quarterbacks in the study. For 
all analysis, statistical significance was defined as alpha of 0.05. Analyses were performed 
with STATA 13.1 (College Station, Tx).


are similarly laid out, not all teams provide Question-Answer style transcripts for download. 
For this analysis, we focus on data from 11 NFL teams for which we could locate transcripts 
from interviews, each in a similar format. The table below lists the teams used in this study.


All data acquisition and natural language processing is done in Python. We downloaded all 
transcript data from the websites for each of the 11 teams, including the name of the 
interviewee, the date of the interview, and all questions and answers. The Hypertext Markup 
Language (HTML) in webpages was processed to extract the information corresponding to 
the interview. The resulting information was stored in text files for later processing. The 
output of this process is a series of text files, each containing the transcript of an interview 
on a date with an individual. The name of the file serves as an identifier for the individual 
and the date. The downloaded files were manually inspected by three volunteers to ensure 
that the content of the articles matched the identifier in the file name.

Data pre-processing

The first step in data pre-processing is removing extraneous information from each 
downloaded transcript. The original downloaded data contains both the questions asked and 
the answers provided by the interviewee. Occasionally, there are also opening statements 
from the interviewee before the Q&A session begins. We automatically pre-process the data 
to remove all questions and any opening statements so that only answers after questions are 
included in the processed text data for analysis. This was done to ensure that we capture 
only responses formed in real-time rather than prepared statements the individuals may have 
formulated prior to a press conference. Additionally, annotations in the transcripts (e.g. 
laughter) are removed from the analysis to focus only on the words of the interviewee. After 
pre-processing each transcript, what remains is a date-stamped stream of text spoken by the 
interviewee in response to specific questions asked by the media.

This initial processing results in a large set of transcripts for everyone in our database. The 
transcripts are of varying lengths; however, for each person in our database, we concatenate 
his transcripts into a single text stream, while preserving the date information for each 
portion of the stream that corresponds to a different transcript. We apply a sliding analysis 
window to the connected stream of texts for each person included in the analysis, selecting 
1000 words at a time with a 30% overlap between two adjacent windows. A window of 1000 
words has been used in other studies analyzing lexical complexity measures in dementia and 
Alzheimer’s disease [22, 23]. Each window may contain data from only a single transcript or 
can include data from multiple (shorter) transcripts. As a rule, we assign the date associated 
with the most recent transcript to each analysis window. The output of this step is a series of 
fixed-length, time-stamped windows from which we will extract the relevant lexical 
complexity measures.

We set two inclusion criteria for subjects in the study: The first criterion is that each player 
should have spoken at least 30,000 words. This ensures that we have at least 35 longitudinal 
samples for each individual for our analysis. The second criterion is that executives and 
coaches should have never played professional football during their career. After filtering 
based on these criteria, our database consists of data from 28 individuals: 10 players and 18 
NFL coaches and executives personnel who have never played in NFL. Together they 
represent 11 out of the 32 NFL teams. After pre-processing, the language sample from each 
individual is greater than 2.1 hours of continuous speech based on average speaking rate of 
150 words per minute. Age and education (number of years in college) information for each 
individual is obtained from various online data sources, including the NFL team websites 
and the personal Wikipedia pages of each individual. The number of years played in the 
NFL was calculated by comparing the date of the first transcript to the date that they were 
drafted. The number of sacks per game was estimated as the total number of sacks (obtained 
from http://www.pro-football-reference.com) divided by the total number of games played.


We analyze linguistic complexity in NFL athletes at risk for CTE

Type-to-token ratio (TTR) and lexical density (LD) are used to characterize 
linguistic complexity

TTR and LD are tracked longitudinally for two groups: NFL athletes and 
coaches/executives

A multilevel mixed model analysis reveals that exposure to the high-impact 
sport (vs no exposure) was associated with an overall decline in language 
complexity scores over time


Table 1.

The table summarizes all players (top) and non-player personnel (bottom) that are included in the present 
study based on inclusion criterion described in the methods session. For the non-player personnel, we provide 
their age (as of the first transcript), and the number of years of secondary education (college + postgraduate). 
For the players, we additionally include the number of years in the NFL, their position on the field, and the 
average number of sacks per game (if Quarterback).

ID

P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

P7

P8

P9

P10

Age

29.8

26.1

28.6

23.7

24.8

26.1

23.9

29.7

23.8

23.3

PLAYERS (P)

Education

Years in NFL

Position

Sacks/game

4

3

4

4

4

3

4

4

3

3

7.1

3.7

5.3

Quarterback

1.79

Nose Tackle

Quarterback

0.27

Quarterback

1.7

4.3

0.4

6.4

1.3

1.1

Cornerback

Wide Receiver

Quarterback

Quarterback

Quarterback

Quarterback

1.64

2.51

1.95

1.81

2.05

2.74

Avg (St. dev.)

26.0 (2.6)

3.6 (0.5)

3.2 (2.5)

2.1 (0.4)

COACHES + FRONT-OFFICE EXECUTIVES (C)

ID

C1

C2

C3

C4

C5

C6

C7

C8

C9

C10

C11

C12

C13

C14

C15

C16

C17

C18

Age

55.1

57.9

33.6

36.1

31.3

63.0

60.9

50.0

47.7

42.8

36.4

63.6

47.3

52.8

45.8

58.7

44.2

36.9

Education

4

4

4

4

3

4

4

5

6

6

4

2

4

4

4

5

2

4

Avg (St. dev.)

48.0 (10.4)

4.1 (1.0)



Effect of exposure to high impact sports (player) on language complexity scores over time, compared to front-
office personnel with no exposure

Table 2.

Unadjusted

Adjusted

‡

Beta

SE

p-value

Beta

SE

p-value

TTR

† −0.016

Player

0.002

0.012

−0.027

0.003

<0.001

Intercept

0.291

0.002

-

0.326

0.007

-

LD

†

Player

0.002

0.001

0.166

−0.004

0.002

0.012

Intercept

0.445

0.002

-

0.466

0.005

†

Main effect of exposure to high impact compared to no exposure among coaches/executives

‡

Adjusted for subject age at first transcript
