

Abstract.
Background: Although memory impairment is the main symptom of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), language impairment can be an
important marker. Relatively few studies of language in AD quantify the impairments in connected speech using computational
techniques.
Objective: We aim to demonstrate state-of-the-art accuracy in automatically identifying Alzheimer’s disease from short narrative
samples elicited with a picture description task, and to uncover the salient linguistic factors with a statistical factor analysis.
Methods: Data are derived from the DementiaBank corpus, from which 167 patients diagnosed with “possible” or “probable”
AD provide 240 narrative samples, and 97 controls provide an additional 233. We compute a number of linguistic variables
from the transcripts, and acoustic variables from the associated audio ﬁles, and use these variables to train a machine learning
classiﬁer to distinguish between participants with AD and healthy controls. To examine the degree of heterogeneity of linguistic
impairments in AD, we follow an exploratory factor analysis on these measures of speech and language with an oblique promax
rotation, and provide interpretation for the resulting factors.
Results: We obtain state-of-the-art classiﬁcation accuracies of over 81% in distinguishing individuals with AD from those
without based on short samples of their language on a picture description task. Four clear factors emerge: semantic impairment,
acoustic abnormality, syntactic impairment, and information impairment.
Conclusion: Modern machine learning and linguistic analysis will be increasingly useful in assessment and clustering of
suspected AD.

Keywords: Automatic data processing, factor analysis, geriatric assessment, heterogeneity, language, statistical

INTRODUCTION

Our aging society faces the rising incidence of
Alzheimer’s disease (AD).
In the absence of a
cure, researchers have mitigated the disease’s impact
through better and earlier diagnosis, and effective
symptomatic treatment. Spoken language is a rich
source of information on an individual’s cognitive sta-
tus. Unfortunately, the utility of naturalistic spoken

∗Correspondence to: Frank Rudzicz, 550 University Avenue,
Room 12-175, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2A2, Canada. Tel.: +1 416
597 3422/Ext. 7971; E-mail: frank@cs.toronto.edu.

language as a quantitative measure has been lim-
ited, due to the time-consuming nature of manual
analysis and human subjectivity. Recent progress in
computational linguistics has brought powerful tools to
bear, showing that fully automated analyses of speech
and language can reliably distinguish patients with
dementia from controls [1–4], and can differentiate
between speciﬁc forms of dementia, such as early
versus advanced stages of AD [5] and non-ﬂuent pro-
gressive aphasia versus semantic dementia [6].

Although memory impairment due to medial tempo-
ral lobe damage is the characteristic symptom of AD,

ISSN 1387-2877/16/$35.00 © 2016 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

408

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

language problems are also prevalent. Patients with AD
frequently exhibit naming deﬁcits, and all aspects of
language become affected as the disease progresses;
typically starting with semantics before proceeding
to syntax and phonology [7]. Since lesions conﬁned
to the medial temporal lobe are typically associated
only with mild impairment of high-level language [8],
the deterioration of distinct micro-linguistic aspects
of language is most likely attributable to the spread
of pathology throughout the cortex. Cortical involve-
ment in AD is highly variable across individuals and
certain distinct variants of AD have been described,
differing in both age-of-onset and cortical atrophy
[9–11]. Among these variants is logopenic progres-
sive aphasia, characterized by left parietal damage
and impairments in phonology and repetition [12,
13]. Other distinct dementia syndromes, such as
progressive non-ﬂuent aphasia and semantic demen-
tia, show clear dissociations between phonological,
syntactic, and semantic impairments related to the
location of cortical pathology, although these syn-
dromes are caused by different pathologies than AD
[14].

Given that cortical damage is heterogeneous in AD
as the disease progresses, both within and across indi-
viduals, it is expected that linguistic symptomatology
would be similarly heterogeneous.

We have two aims. First, we test classiﬁcation accu-
racy given automated analysis of narrative speech
samples from a picture description task using machine
learning methods. Second, we explore the heterogene-
ity of linguistic impairment among participants with
AD. Using exploratory factor analysis, we extract
four factors that account for the majority of the
variance among speakers. An oblique factor rotation
method (promax) is used, as this method allows the
underlying factors to be correlated, rather than guar-
anteeing orthogonality. Thus, we are able to identify
the degree to which linguistic abilities decline in
parallel through dementia, as opposed to varying inde-
pendently between subjects that experience varying
extents of cortical degeneration.

Background

Although memory impairment is the main symp-
tom of AD, language impairment can be an important
marker. Faber-Langendoen et al. [15] found that 36%
of mild AD patients and 100% of severe AD patients
had aphasia, according to standard aphasia testing pro-
tocols. Ahmed et al. [16] found that two-thirds of their
participants showed subtle, but signiﬁcant, changes in

connected speech production up to a year before their
diagnosis of probable AD. Weiner et al. [17], in a
study of 486 AD patients, reported a signiﬁcant cor-
relation between dementia severity and a number of
different linguistic measures, including confrontation
naming, articulation, word-ﬁnding ability, and seman-
tic ﬂuency.

Declining performance on naming tasks can occur
early in the disease progression [7, 18–20]. Krishner
et al. [19] found that all the AD participants in their
study were impaired on a naming task, even when their
language functioning was normal by other measures.
Individuals with AD can have difﬁculty retrieving the
names of people and places [21], and may substi-
tute generic terms for more speciﬁc ones [7, 18, 22].
Numerous studies have reported a greater impairment
in category naming ﬂuency (e.g., naming animals or
tools) relative to letter naming ﬂuency (e.g., naming
words that start with the letter R) [23–25], and this
ﬁnding was supported by a meta-analysis of 153 stud-
ies [26]. There is also some evidence that patients with
AD may have more difﬁculty naming verbs than nouns.
Robinson et al. [27] found that AD participants per-
formed worse on a picture-naming task for verbs than
nouns, even when the verbs and nouns were spelled and
pronounced the same, and matched for frequency. As
a result of word-ﬁnding difﬁculties and a reduction in
working vocabulary, the language of AD patients can
seem ‘empty’ [28, 29], and was described by Appell
et al. [30] as “verbose and circuitous, running on with
a semblance of ﬂuency, yet incomplete and lacking
coherence.”

Macro-linguistic language functions, such as under-
standing metaphor and sarcasm, also tend to deteriorate
in AD [31]. Thematic coherence, or the ability to
maintain a theme throughout a discourse, may also be
impaired. In a study comparing 9 AD participants to
healthy controls and participants with ﬂuent aphasia,
Glosser and Deser [32] found that the AD participants
showed a reduction in global coherence in a structured
interview task. Blonder et al. [33] reported a similar
result when interviewing ﬁve AD participants and their
healthy spouses.

The effect of AD on syntax is controversial. Some
researchers have reported syntactic impairments in
AD, while others claim that any apparent deﬁcits are
in fact due to difﬁculties with memory and seman-
tics [18]. Several studies have found evidence for a
decrease in the syntactic complexity of language in AD
[34–36]. Croisile et al. [34] compared oral and written
picture descriptions from 22 AD patients and matched
controls, and found that the AD patients produced

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

409

fewer subordinate clauses than controls. Ehrlich et
al. [35] reported a reduced utterance length on nar-
rative tasks administered to 16 AD participants and
controls. In a study comparing language production
in AD and semantic dementia, Sajjadi et al. [36]
found that their 20 patients with mild AD tended to
produce fewer complex syntactic units on both a pic-
ture description task and an interview. On the other
hand, Kempler et al. [37] found that 10 individuals
with AD used a range of syntactic constructions with
the same frequency as control participants in sponta-
neous conversation, despite showing signs of lexical
impairment. Glosser and Deser [32] similarly did not
ﬁnd any difference in syntactic complexity or correct-
ness between AD patients and controls in spontaneous
speech.

There is evidence that language decline in AD is
heterogeneous. Hodges and Patterson [38] divided 52
AD patients into three different categories based on
dementia severity and assessed their semantic impair-
ment on a number of different tasks. They reported
a wide range of performance in the “minimal” and
“mild” AD groups. Duong et al. [39] had 46 AD partic-
ipants produce narratives based on a single picture and
a series of pictures. A cluster analysis subsequently
revealed a number of different discourse patterns
rather than a single characteristic pattern of impair-
ment. Ahmed et al. [16] contrasted their ﬁndings of
heterogeneous language decline in connected speech
from 15 AD patients with the more predictable pat-
terns of decline seen in primary progressive aphasia
(PPA).

Related computational work

A relatively small subset of studies on language
in AD attempt to quantify the impairments in con-
nected speech using computational techniques. Bucks
et al. [1] conducted a linear discriminant analysis of
spontaneous speech from 8 AD participants and 16
healthy controls. They considered eight linguistic fea-
tures, including part-of-speech (POS) tag frequencies
and measures of lexical diversity, and obtained a cross-
validation accuracy of 87.5%.

Thomas et al. [5] classiﬁed spontaneous speech sam-
ples from 95 AD patients and an unspeciﬁed number
of controls by treating the problem as an authorship
attribution task, and employing a “common N-grams”
approach. They were able to distinguish between
patients with severe AD and controls with a best accu-
racy of 94.5%, and between patients with mild AD and
controls with a best accuracy of 75.3%. They suggested

that closed-class words were particularly informative
in their analysis.

Guinn and Habash [3] built classiﬁers to distinguish
between AD and non-AD language samples using 80
conversations between 31 AD patients and 57 cogni-
tively normal conversation partners. They found that
features such as POS tags and measures of lexical
diversity were less useful than measuring ﬁlled pauses,
repetitions, and incomplete words, and achieved a best
accuracy of 79.5%.

Meil´an et al. [2] distinguished between 30 AD
patients and 36 healthy controls with temporal and
acoustic features alone, obtaining an accuracy of
84.8%. For each participant, their speech sample con-
sisted of two sentences read from a screen. The ﬁve
most discriminating features were percentage of voice
breaks, number of voice breaks, number of periods of
voice, shimmer, and noise-to-harmonics ratio.

Jarrold et al. [4] used acoustic features, POS
features, and psychologically-motivated word lists
to distinguish between semi-structured interview
responses from 9 AD participants and 9 controls with
an accuracy of 88%. They also conﬁrmed their hypoth-
esis that AD patients would use more pronouns, verbs,
and adjectives and fewer nouns than controls.

Rentoumi et al. [40] considered a slightly dif-
ferent problem: they used computational techniques
to differentiate between picture descriptions from
AD participants with and without additional vascular
pathology (n = 18 for each group). They achieved an
accuracy of up to 75% when they included frequency
unigrams and excluded binary unigrams, syntactic
complexity features, measures of vocabulary richness,
and information theoretic features.

Orimaye et al. [41] obtained F-measure scores up
to 0.74 using a relatively restricted feature set on
transcripts from DementiaBank, although they com-
bined participants with different etiologies, rather
than focusing on AD. Other related work has con-
sidered the automatic analysis of language in other
types of dementia, including semantic dementia [42],
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) [43, 44], and PPA
[6].

Our study differs from previous work in several
ways. Along with Orimaye et al. [41], we con-
sider a much larger sample size than most previous
work, giving a more representative sample for
machine learning. We also consider a larger num-
ber of features to help capture the array of different
language impairments that can be seen in AD, and
conduct factor analysis to characterize patterns of
heterogeneity.

410

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Our data are derived from the DementiaBank
corpus1, which is part of the larger TalkBank project
[45]. These data were collected between 1983 and
1988 as part of the Alzheimer Research Program at the
University of Pittsburgh. Information about the study
cohort is available from Becker et al. [46]. Participants
were referred directly from the Benedum Geriatric
Center at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Cen-
ter, and others were recruited through the Allegheny
County Medical Society, local neurologists and psy-
chiatrists, and public service messages on local media.
To be eligible for inclusion in the study, all participants
were required to be above 44 years of age, have at least
7 years of education, have no history of nervous system
disorders or be taking neuroleptic medication, have an
initial Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) score of 10 or
greater, and be able to give informed consent. Addition-
ally, participants with dementia were required to have a
relative or caregiver to act as an informant. All partic-
ipants received an extensive neuropsychological and
physical assessment (see [46] for complete details).
Participants were assigned to the “patient” group pri-
marily based on a history of cognitive and functional
decline, and the results of a mental status examina-
tion. In 1992, several years after the study had ended,
the ﬁnal diagnosis of each patient was reviewed on the
basis of their clinical record and any additional relevant
information (in some cases, autopsy).

From the “Dementia” group, we include partici-
pants with a diagnosis of “possible AD” or “probable
AD”, resulting in 240 samples from 167 participants.
We also include control participants, resulting in 233
additional ﬁles from 97 speakers. Demographics are
given in Table 1. We compute averages over individual
sessions instead of individual participants in order to
capture intra-speaker variation over the ﬁve years these
data were collected. The two groups are not matched
for age and education, which is one limitation of these
data.

Narrative speech was elicited using the “Cookie
Theft” picture description task from the Boston
Diagnostic Aphasia Examination [47]. This protocol
instructs the examiner to show the picture to the patient
and say, “Tell me everything you see going on in this
picture.” The examiner is permitted to encourage the
patient to keep going if they do not produce very
many words. Each speech sample was recorded then
manually transcribed at the word level following the

1Downloaded November 22, 2013.

Table 1
Demographics of DementiaBank data

AD (n = 240)

Control (n = 233)

Age (years)
Education (years)
Gender (male/female)
Mini-Mental State Exam

71.8 (8.5)
12.5 (2.9)
82/158
18.5 (5.1)

65.2 (7.8)
14.1 (2.4)
82/151
29.1 (1.1)

TalkBank CHAT (Codes for the Human Analysis of
Transcripts) protocol [48]. Narratives were segmented
into utterances and annotated with ﬁlled pauses, para-
phasias, and unintelligible words.

From the CHAT transcripts, we keep only the word-
level transcription and the utterance segmentation. We
discard the morphological analysis, dysﬂuency anno-
tations, and other associated information, as our goal
is to create a fully automated system that does not
require the input of a human annotator. Before tagging
and parsing the transcripts, we automatically remove
short false starts consisting of two letters or fewer (e.g.,
The c-cookie jar would become The cookie jar) and
ﬁlled pauses such as uh, um, er, and ah (e.g., The
um um boy would become The boy). All other dys-
ﬂuencies (including repetitions, revisions, paraphasias,
and comments about the task) remain in the transcript.
The AD participants produce an average of 104.3 (SD:
59.0) words per narrative, while the control partici-
pants produce an average of 114.4 (SD: 59.5) words
per narrative, although the distribution in both cases is
somewhat right-skewed.

Each transcript has an associated audio ﬁle, allowing
for lexical and acoustic analysis in parallel, which we
convert from MP3 to 16-bit mono WAV format with a
sampling rate of 16 kHz.

Features

We consider a large number (370) of features to
capture a wide range of linguistic phenomena. Here
we provide a brief description of the different feature
types; a full explanation of each feature can be found
in the Supplementary Material.

Part-of-speech

Some language changes in AD may be detected
by measuring the production of different POS. For
example, Ahmed et al. [16] reported changes in the
number of pronouns and verbs, and Bucks et al. [1]
and Jarrold et al. [4] reported a decrease in the pro-
portion of nouns and an increase in the proportion
of pronouns, adjectives, and verbs. We extract POS

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

411

information automatically using the Stanford tagger2.
We compute the frequency of occurrence of different
POS, normalized by the total number of words in each
utterance. We also compute ratios, e.g., nouns to verbs,
pronouns to nouns. As described in the previous sec-
tion, we remove the ﬁlled pauses uh, um, er, and ah, but
we keep track of the frequency of occurrence of each
type, as previous work has suggested that they may
serve different purposes [49]. We also tag words which
do not appear in the English dictionary (i.e., “not in
dictionary”, or NID), which include paraphasias (e.g.,
the sink’s overﬂown) or word fragments that were not
removed in the pre-processing phase (e.g., In her kitch-
kitchen I suppose). Paraphasias or fragmented words
that result in the unintentional production of another
English word are not detected by our system.

Although we do not consider the manually anno-
tated POS tags from the DementiaBank corpus in our
analysis, we can use that information to test the perfor-
mance of the Stanford tagger on this data. The task is
complicated by the fact that the Stanford tagger and the
CHAT protocol use different tagsets, the CHAT proto-
col does not include dysﬂuencies in the morphological
analysis, and the DementiaBank corpus includes some
user-deﬁned tags. With those caveats in mind, we ﬁnd
the Stanford tagger has an accuracy of 85.4% on the
control data, and 84.8% on the AD data (over the entire
data sample).

Syntactic complexity

As discussed above, the degree to which syntactic
complexity is affected in AD is uncertain. We measure
the syntactic complexity of the picture descriptions
using a number of well-known metrics, including the
mean length of sentences, T-units, and clauses, and
by calculating scores based on the parse tree, includ-
ing the height of the tree and the mean, total, and
maximum Yngve depth (a measure of embeddedness)
[50]. Parse trees are computed using the Stanford
parser3.

Grammatical constituents

We quantify the constituents comprising the parse
tree, in a set of ‘context-free grammar’ (CFG) features.
This allows us to explore possible syntactic differences
in AD in greater detail than the more general syn-
tactic complexity metrics. Previous work has shown

that these features can distinguish between partici-
pants with agrammatic aphasia and matched controls
on a story-telling task [51]. To calculate these features,
we compute the frequency of occurrence of different
grammatical constituents, normalized by the total num-
ber of constituents in the sample. For example, we can
count the number of noun phrases (NP) that consist of
a determiner (DT) and a noun (NN) (i.e., NP −→ DT
NN), a noun without a determiner (NP −→ NN), a pro-
noun (NP −→ PRP), etc. The symbols used here are
from the Penn Treebank tagset4. We also consider the
rate, proportion, and average length of noun phrases,
verb phrases (VP), and prepositional phrases (PP). This
is based on work by Chae and Nenkova [52], except
that rather than assess these features for each utter-
ance in the narrative, we compute them for the entire
narrative.

Psycholinguistics

A semantic impairment may manifest

in an
increased reliance on highly familiar words. We there-
fore rate each word on existing psycholinguistic norms.
Speciﬁcally, we use the SUBTL frequency norms
[53] and the combined Bristol and Gilhooly-Logie
norms [54, 55] for familiarity, imageability, and age-of-
acquisition. We compute the average of each of these
for all content words, as well as for nouns and verbs
separately.

Vocabulary richness

We assess the vocabulary richness (i.e.,

lexical
diversity) of a narrative sample using a number of
different metrics, including type-token ratio, moving-
average type-token ratio, Brunet’s index, and Honor´e’s
statistic. Type-token ratio (TTR) is widely reported,
but has also been criticized for its dependence on
text length [56, 57]. Moving-average type-token ratio
(MATTR) was proposed by Covington and McFall
[58] as an adaptation of TTR that is independent
of text length. In a study on language in aphasia,
MATTR was reported to be one of the best metrics
for providing an unbiased metric of lexical diver-
sity [59]. Brunet’s index and Honor´e’s statistic are
alternative measures of vocabulary richness that have
been used in previous computational studies of AD
[1, 3, 5].

2Version 2015-01-29 http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/tagger.shtml.
3Version 2010-11-30, nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml.

4For the full tag list, see: http://www.comp.leeds.ac.uk/amalgam/

tagsets/upenn.html.

412

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

Information content

Repetitiveness

Previous studies of AD narratives in picture descrip-
tion tasks have reported decreased information content
[16, 34, 36, 60, 61]. We measure this computationally
by searching for relevant lexical items that point to
each of the expected information units listed in Croisile
et al. [34]. For example, the occurrence of the word
boy, son, or brother all suggest that the information
unit “boy” has been mentioned. Our information unit
features are binary: either a word related to a given
information unit has been mentioned, or not. For infor-
mation units describing actions, such as “the boy or
stool falling”, we use the dependency structure from
the Stanford parser to locate phrases with fall as the
verb and boy or stool as the subject. There are obvi-
ous limitations to this method: if a word is used in
the incorrect context (e.g., if the speaker refers to the
girl as the mother), then it would be applied to the
wrong information unit, or if a speaker refers to a con-
cept in an unpredictable way (e.g., refers to the woman
at the sink as the nurse), then that information unit
will not be counted. However, this method provides
a simple, automated estimate of informativeness. A
similar method was used by Pakhomov et al. [62] to
automatically score picture descriptions from partici-
pants with frontotemporal lobar degeneration, and by
Hakkani-T¨ur et al. [63] to score picture descriptions
from elderly, cognitively healthy speakers. A certi-
ﬁed speech-language pathologist also annotated these
information units over a random 5% of the data and
we compared these against the automatically identiﬁed
units. There was an observed agreement of 98.02%,
which corresponds to a Cohen’s kappa coefﬁcient of
0.8037, which is the maximum possible given observed
marginal frequencies (p < 0.05).

We also measure the frequency of speciﬁc words rel-
evant to the Cookie Theft picture. For example, mother
and woman both provide evidence for the “woman”
information unit, as described above, but by counting
the frequency of occurrence of the two words sepa-
rately we can also detect if one participant group is
more likely than the other to refer to the woman as a
mother. We call these features “key words”, and they
are integer-valued frequency counts. Previous work
(e.g., [40, 42]) has shown the utility of simple binary
and frequency unigrams (word tokens). Rather than
considering the space of all possible unigrams, we have
considered only a smaller set which we have deemed
to be relevant to the expected information content, to
avoid problems of data sparsity, and to help improve
the interpretability of the selected features.

AD patients can exhibit perseverative behavior
in different areas of their lives, including in their
language [64, 65]. Nicholas et al. [28] found that in a
picture description task, AD patients repeated words
and phrases more frequently than healthy controls
and also more frequently than participants with ﬂuent
aphasia. Tomoeda et al. [65] found also that AD
patients were more likely to repeat ideas in a picture
description task than healthy controls, and that the
frequency of repetitions was not related to severity of
dementia.

Using a bag-of-words, we measure the cosine dis-
tance between each pair of utterances in the session. We
remove a short list of stopwords, after observing that
utterances such as He is standing on the stool and He is
holding the cookie could be considered relatively sim-
ilar given the common occurrences of he, is, and the.
A distance of zero between two utterances indicates
that the two utterances are identical (in word counts,
not necessarily order). We detect the occurrence of
repetitive content by measuring average distance, and
the proportion of utterance pairs that fall below some
threshold.

Acoustics

Several acoustic features are extracted from the
audio. We include a number of features which are
indicative of pathological speech [2, 43, 62, 66]. We
also include a set of features based on Mel-frequency
cepstral coefﬁcients (MFCCs), which are nearly ubiq-
uitously used in speech recognition research [67].
MFCCs, in some sense, encode the ‘spectrum of the
spectrum’ in that they are the discrete cosine trans-
form of logarithms of spectral power; this separates the
source of a signal (i.e., the energy of the lungs) from the
‘ﬁlter’ of the signal (i.e., the upper vocal tract, in which
phonemes are differentiated phonologically). The
aforementioned spectrum is also mapped into the Mel
scale, which approximates the sensitivity of the human
ear. Individual coefﬁcients are strictly components of a
de-convolution process, but they can be loosely associ-
ated with articulatory phenomena in the sense that low
indices correspond to lower resonances in the vocal
tract. In order to compare differences across speak-
ers, we consider the mean, variance, skewness, and
kurtosis of the ﬁrst 42 MFCCs through time, and the
kurtosis and skewness of the means across each MFCC
dimension.

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

413

Identiﬁcation of AD by machine learning

Machine learning is a subﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelli-
gence in which statistical models are constructed from
data automatically. Typically, this involves iterative
reﬁnement of models with the aim of increasing their
overall accuracy. We also perform multilinear logistic
regression with nominal outputs, allowing for interac-
tions between categories and coefﬁcients.

Our evaluation criterion is accuracy, which is the
ratio of true positives plus true negatives over all eval-
uation examples. We have considered training models
that identify AD based solely on textual or acoustic fea-
tures, separately. However, as we have demonstrated
in [69], allowing feature selection to choose from all
available measures provides uniformly higher accu-
racy than restricting the set to only textual or acoustic
features. This may be anticipated, as it lessens the
expected redundancy between selected features in any
single modality. As discussed in the Results, those fea-
tures are a fairly balanced set of textual and acoustic
ones.

We perform a 10-fold cross-validation procedure in
which a unique 10% of the data (i.e., the ‘test set’) are
used in each iteration for evaluation, and the remain-
ing 90% (i.e., the ‘training set’) are used to select the
most useful features (of the 370 available as described
in “Features” above) and construct our models. The
reported accuracy is an average across the 10 folds.
In a given fold, data from any individual speaker can
occur in the test set or the training set, but not both.
In order to optimize the ratio of training examples
to their dimensionality, we select the N features with
the highest Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients between
each feature and the binary class. Since in each fold
we are selecting features based only on a subset of
the data, these features need not always be the same
in each iteration, although we show in the Supplemen-
tary Material that there is very little variability between
folds for N < 100 (see the Supplementary Material for
the full details).

RESULTS

Figure 1 shows the average accuracies (and s.d.) for
the logistic regression method. The maximum aver-
age accuracy (81.92%) in distinguishing between AD
and controls is achieved with the 35 top-ranked fea-
tures. The accuracy remains relatively constant until
we choose a feature set of size 50 (accuracy = 78.72%),
after which it drops off sharply. As a result, we use

the top 50 features in our factor analysis. Those fea-
tures, and their correlation with diagnosis, are shown in
Table 2. Using all 370 features, the logistic regression
method obtains 58.51% accuracy on average, which
reinforces the need to do feature selection given high-
dimensional feature space such as this.

Factor analysis

To help discover the underlying structure of the data,
we conduct an exploratory factor analysis. Since our
data do not satisfy the assumption of multivariate nor-
mality, we use the method of principal axis factors
(PAF), as recommended by Fabrigar et al. [70]. We
include 50 features in the factor analysis, as discussed
in the previous section.

A screen test suggests that four factors are sufﬁcient
to account for the majority of the variance. To interpret
the factor structure, it is customary to perform a rota-
tion. Although varimax is the most popular rotation
algorithm, it is an orthogonal rotation and is there-
fore guaranteed to produce uncorrelated factors. To
fairly examine the degree of heterogeneity of linguistic
impairments in patients with AD, we chose promax, an
oblique rotation which allows factors to be correlated
with each other [71].

Feature loadings on the four factors are presented
in Table 2. Factor signs were deliberately set such
that higher factor scores reﬂect greater impairment. As
is customary in exploratory factor analysis, we name
and present a subjective interpretation of the factors,
below.

Factor 1: Semantic impairment

All of the high loadings reﬂect characteristics of
semantically impoverished language, similar to that
seen in semantic dementia, a degenerative disorder
speciﬁcally affecting the temporal lobe [72]. Indi-
viduals scoring high on this factor produce many
pronouns (+NP −→ PRP, +pronoun ratio) and few
nouns (–nouns), and are biased toward shorter (–word
length) and higher frequency words (+frequency, +verb
frequency). They also use a less diverse vocabulary
(–Honor´e’s statistic) and exhibit increased repetition
of content (–cosine distance).

Pronouns and high frequency words suggest empty,
vague, or non-speciﬁc speech. A decrease in the pro-
portion of nouns and an increase in the proportion of
verbs is the same pattern as seen in semantic demen-
tia [73, 74]. Individuals with a semantic impairment
may have difﬁculty accessing more speciﬁc nouns and

414

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

Fig. 1. Accuracies and standard errors, across the number N of predictor features used.

verbs, and as a result may replace them with generic,
high-frequency substitutes (e.g., Meteyard et al. [75]).
Negative Honor´e’s statistic suggests low lexical diver-
sity, which has been observed in anomic aphasia [76],
and negative cosine distance suggests high repetition,
which bears similarity to the “stereotypic thematic
perseverations” seen in semantic dementia [73].
Examples of the adverbial construction (+ADVP −→
RB) include “the little girl’s reaching up there” and “a
tree coming up here”; that is, the adverb serves a deic-
tic purpose, which is more common amongst aphasics
with a semantic impairment [77].

Factor 2: Acoustic abnormality

All high loadings here relate to features derived from
acoustic analysis. All but one of these refer to either the
skewness or kurtosis of individual Mel-frequency cep-
stral coefﬁcients, whose perceptual values may not be
distinguishable to humans, and whose anatomical basis
depends on treating the vocal tract within a source-
ﬁlter model of convolution. The remaining feature,
phonation rate, is the proportion of an utterance that
is vocalized; low values here refer to more time being
spent silently, as in a pause.

Factor 3: Syntactic impairment

This factor appears to reﬂect a syntactic deﬁcit
somewhat reminiscent of such conditions as Broca’s

aphasia and progressive nonﬂuent aphasia. High-
scoring patients produced fewer verbs, which is typical
of agrammatic patients (e.g., Saffran et al. [78], and
Thompson et al. [79]). They also produced fewer
auxiliary verbs, and fewer gerunds and participles.
Patients with Broca’s aphasia often omit auxiliaries
and use only the simplest verb tenses (e.g., he reach
might be preferred over he is reaching, which requires
an auxiliary and a participle) [80, 81]. Additionally,
they produced more sentence fragments, and more
words tagged as “not in dictionary,” which could
include phonological paraphasias, distortions, and
unrecognizable words (note that the automatic analy-
sis cannot distinguish between these different language
phenomena). We note that while these deﬁcits resem-
ble Broca’s aphasia and progressive nonﬂuent aphasia
(PNFA) in their form, they are less severe, seldom
reaching the point of frank agrammatism or “tele-
graphic” speech seen in those disorders. Presumably
this reﬂects the fact that cortical damage to language
centers in AD is less severe than in those conditions.

Factor 4: Information impairment

This factor primarily includes mention of key words
and information units. Patients with high scores pro-
duced relatively uninformative picture descriptions,
failing to mention key concepts. This factor differs
from Factor 1 in that the relevant features do not
describe generic properties of the words, such as their

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

415

Table 2
Correlations with diagnosis (ﬁrst column) and promax factor loadings. Loadings less than 0.1
are excluded. Bold font indicates a loading greater than 0.3.

r

Fac. 1

Fac. 2

Fac. 4

Comm.

Pronoun:noun ratio
NP -> PRP
Frequency
Adverbs
ADVP -> RB
Verb frequency
Nouns
Word length
NP -> DT NN
Honore’s statistic
Inﬂected verbs
Average cosine distance
Skewness(MFCC 1)
Skewness(MFCC 2)
Kurtosis(MFCC 5)
Kurtosis(VEL(MFCC 3))
Phonation rate
Skewness(MFCC 8)
Not-in-dictionary
ROOT -> FRAG
Verbs
VP rate
VP -> AUX VP
VP -> VBG
Key word: window
Info unit: window
KEY WORD: sink
KEY WORD: cookie
PP proportion
Key word: curtain
PP rate
Info unit: curtain
Key word: counter
Info unit: cookie
Info unit: sink
Info unit: girl
Info unit: girl’s action
Info unit: dish
Key word: stool
Key word: mother
Info unit: stool
Skewness(MFCC 12)
Info unit: woman
VP -> VBG PP
VP -> IN S
VP -> AUX ADJP
VP -> AUX
VP -> VBD NP
Cosine cutoff: 0.5
INTJ -> UH

0.35
0.37
0.34
0.31
0.30
0.21
–0.27
–0.41
0.10
–0.25
–0.19
–0.19
0.22
0.20
0.19
0.24
–0.21
–0.22
0.38
0.23
–0.29
–0.19
–0.23
–0.27
–0.29
–0.32
–0.23
–0.23
–0.21
–0.25
–0.21
–0.26
–0.18
–0.24
–0.31
–0.30
–0.25
–0.24
–0.28
–0.32
–0.32
–0.19
–0.29
–0.34
–0.20
–0.19
0.20
0.19
0.19
0.18

1.01
0.88
0.74
0.51
0.44
0.39
–0.97
–0.60
–0.52
–0.46
–0.39
–0.33

–0.17
0.16

–0.14
–0.15
0.38
0.37
–0.16
–0.28

–0.12
–0.15

–0.29

–0.19

–0.11
0.28

0.25

Fac. 3

–0.32
–0.24

0.10
0.13
0.37
–0.13

0.19

–0.19
0.33

–0.14

–0.14

–0.15

0.13

–0.14

0.24
–0.28
–0.13
0.26
0.19
0.20
0.32
0.18
0.21
–0.79
–0.63
–0.62
–0.61
–0.61
–0.56
–0.55
–0.53
–0.47
–0.46
–0.43
–0.42
–0.36
–0.29
–0.29
–0.26
–0.21
–0.18
–0.18
–0.12
–0.10

0.95
0.87
0.78
0.44
–0.62
–0.39

0.13

0.53
0.36
–1.05
–0.95
–0.56
–0.34
0.20
0.12

0.18

0.19

0.14

0.13

–0.12

–0.27

–0.16
–0.30

0.15

0.14

0.80
0.59
0.56
0.39
0.25
0.21
0.79
0.39
0.37
0.21
0.21
0.14
0.84
0.68
0.54
0.34
0.56
0.23
0.35
0.18
0.81
0.70
0.34
0.21
0.50
0.36
0.30
0.29
0.34
0.25
0.33
0.27
0.19
0.24
0.24
0.20
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.17
0.25
0.06
0.14
0.23
0.04
0.02
0.10
0.03
0.10
0.08

frequency or part-of-speech, but rather their appro-
priateness and speciﬁc semantic relevance to the task
at hand. These participants also lacked prepositional
phrases, which reﬂects a lower level of detail in their
descriptions. There may be some relation between
the absence of certain information units and a reduc-

tion in prepositional phrases. For example, both the
information unit and key word features for “sink” are
negatively weighted on this factor. When we exam-
ined the control transcripts, we found that in 57% of
cases, the word sink appeared as the object of a preposi-
tional phrase (e.g., water’s overﬂowing in the sink, the

416

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

water is spilling out from the sink, the mother’s work-
ing at the sink). This potential connection between the
omission of certain content words and a reduction in
prepositional phrases will require further investigation
in future work.

Relationships among factors

Figure 2 shows pairwise scatterplots of individ-
ual transcript scores on each factor. All four factors
are signiﬁcantly different between groups, which is
not surprising given that the features comprising the
factors were pre-selected for their association with
diagnosis. Of greater interest is the degree of corre-
lation among the factors, which can be estimated by
the oblique promax rotation, as opposed to orthogonal
rotations such as varimax that guarantee uncorrelated
factors. The correlation coefﬁcients among all sam-
ples, and limited to AD and control subjects alone, are
given in each plot.

An intriguing result is the correlation between Fac-
tor 1 (semantic impairment) and Factor 3 (syntactic
impairment). These factors are moderately correlated
in the control group (R = 0.42) but much less corre-
lated in the AD group (R = 0.19). This suggests that
in cognitively normal individuals, semantic and syn-
tactic abilities are somewhat linked, but when these
abilities decline in AD, there can be an asymmetry to
the impairment. This may be attributable to damage
speciﬁc to networks responsible for distinct aspects of
linguistic competence (see discussion).

Another pattern is seen when we consider Factor
4 (information impairment). Factor 1 and Factor 4 are
more highly correlated in the AD group (R = 0.49) than
the control group (0.18). Similarly, Factor 3 and Factor
4 are more highly correlated in the AD group (R = 0.31)
than the control group (–0.097). Since information
is expressed through both syntax and semantics, we
hypothesize that difﬁculty in either Factor 1 or Factor
3 would also imply impairment in conveying informa-
tion. That a similar correlation is not seen in the control
data might be due to the fact that the task is generally
easy for controls, and our method for scoring infor-
mation units is very simplistic. For example, when we
look at individual transcripts, we ﬁnd a control par-
ticipant who uses a number of pronouns and generic,
high frequency words (thing, something). However,
this semantic “impairment” does not prevent the partic-
ipant from mentioning most of the relevant information
units. Conversely, a control participant who uses more
detailed language will not be able to increase their

information score beyond what our simple keyword-
spotting algorithm can detect.

Factor 2 (acoustic abnormality) is uncorrelated with
Factor 1 (semantic impairment) and Factor 3 (syntac-
tic impairment) in both the AD and control groups.
Factor 2 is moderately correlated with Factor 4 (infor-
mation impairment) in the AD (R = 0.32) and control
(R = 0.31) groups. This would suggest that participants
who spoke slower (phonation rate) or had some other
acoustic irregularity (MFCC features) also offered less
information, regardless of their clinical diagnosis.

DISCUSSION

Although language impairment is a secondary cog-
nitive symptom of AD, numerous studies have shown
that language skills become abnormal relatively early
in AD [82, 83] and can serve as a sensitive index of
disease severity over time. The present study employs
a combination of automated quantiﬁcation of language
with a machine-learning classiﬁcation approach to
accurately distinguish between healthy controls and
patients with AD on the basis of short speech samples
from a picture description task.

The relatively short length (roughly 100 words) of
the picture descriptions is one drawback of the current
study. Other researchers have suggested that 150 words
is an acceptable minimum length for language analysis
[36, 78]. Our classiﬁcation results indicate that there
is still valuable information to be found in the short
samples, conﬁrming previous studies using picture
descriptions to assess language in dementia [40, 42,
74]; however, we expect that the accuracies of each
feature value would increase as the length of the sam-
ple increased. We also emphasize that our ﬁndings
here do not necessarily generalize to other spoken lan-
guage tasks. For example, Sajjadi et al. [36] found that
the picture description was more sensitive to seman-
tic impairment in AD, while an interview format was
more sensitive to syntactic measures.

Factor analysis reveals that our relatively large
set of linguistic measures can be mapped to four
latent variables, broadly representing syntax/ﬂuency,
semantics, acoustic differences, and other information
content. Each of these language domains has been
reported separately to be altered in patients with
AD/MCI [2, 84–86], but the relationships between
separate domains of impairment have seldom been
characterized. Many previous studies have relied
upon labor-intensive manual analyses of language

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

417

Fig. 2. Promax scores for AD and control participants.

samples, emphasizing particular aspects according to
the research interests of the authors. The large het-
erogeneity in language impairments reported across
studies leaves open the question of whether there is a
single quantiﬁable aspect of spoken language output
that is particularly diagnostic of AD. The heterogene-
ity of reported impairments is presumably attributable
to two sources of variability: differences between
individual patients, and differences in the methods and
hypotheses employed by the authors of the studies.

For the present study, we aimed to capture as broad
a spectrum of linguistic variables as possible using
fully automated analysis of transcripts and acoustic
recordings, from a relatively large sample of picture
descriptions. This approach, while potentially missing
some useful variables that require manual analysis,
can characterize the level of heterogeneity present
across individual patients tested with a consistent
protocol. Previous studies of cognitive decline in
MCI/AD have highlighted considerable heterogeneity

418

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

among patients, but have tended to view language as
a fairly unitary construct along with other cognitive
domains including episodic memory and visuospatial
cognition. Despite this heterogeneity,
there seems
to be a typical pattern of decline in AD particularly
driven by impairments in episodic memory [87],
with other domains affected in a more limited set
of patients.

Heterogeneity in the cognitive proﬁle of AD has
been linked to different patterns of brain atrophy.
Nearly all cases of AD include atrophy in the hip-
pocampus and other parts of the medial temporal
to underlie the episodic
lobe, which is thought
memory impairments. Involvement of the left parietal
lobe has been linked to reduced speech output in
the form of
logopenic progressive aphasia (see
below), while atrophy in the right parietal lobe and
occipital cortex are associated with visuospatial
impairments [9]. These cortical presentations of
AD represent less common variants than the typical
pattern of medial
In contrast,
semantic impairments are quite commonly reported
in the later stages of AD, consistent with the fact
that temporal lobe structures involved in semantic
processing are among the most frequently affected
in late-stage AD, whereas frontal-parietal regions
involved in syntax and phonology are often relatively
spared [88].

temporal atrophy.

Variability in the cognitive presentation of AD is to
be expected, given that different patients have dam-
age to different parts of the cortex. To date, little
work has been done to characterize the relationship
between impairments on speciﬁc subdomains of lan-
guage and cortical atrophy in AD. This situation
contrasts strongly with that of PPA, a less common
form of dementia in which deterioration of language is
the most notable symptom. A current consensus among
researchers holds that PPA can be clearly divided into
at least three subtypes characterized by impairments
to distinct aspects of language [72]. In PNFA, syn-
tax and grammar are greatly affected, while semantic
knowledge is spared. PNFA is linked to pathology in
the left frontal cortex, and somewhat resembles the
syndrome of Broca’s aphasia, linked to stroke-induced
damage in the same region. In semantic dementia, word
knowledge is greatly reduced but grammar is largely
spared. This syndrome is linked to degeneration of
the anterior temporal lobes. In logopenic progressive
aphasia, subtler syntactic deﬁcits are present (mainly
a simpliﬁcation of spontaneous output, and reduced
ﬂuency), and repetition may be impaired. Logopenic
progressive aphasia is linked to damage to the left

temporoparietal junction, and unlike the other two sub-
types of PPA, it is considered to be an atypical presenta-
tion of AD, as it shares the same underlying molecular
pathology [12].

The double dissociation of syntactic and semantic
impairments in PPA highlights the fact that distinct
brain networks make unique contributions to linguistic
competence. Thus, even though the episodic mem-
ory impairment dominates the cognitive proﬁle of
AD/MCI patients, variability in cortical involvement
across patients should differentially impact the same
subdomains of language that are affected in PPA. How-
ever, this variability in AD/MCI is likely to be more
subtle than between PPA subtypes, as the patients do
not fall into clearly distinguishable diagnostic cate-
gories.

In the present study, we characterized the hetero-
geneity of language impairment using factor analysis.
The choice of rotation method is critical here: the
majority of exploratory factor analyses of cognitive
impairment use varimax rotation (e.g., Duong et al.
[39]; Monti et al. [89]), which is guaranteed to produce
factors that are uncorrelated with each other. While this
can be useful for discovering the underlying domains
of impairment and interpreting them, the enforced lack
of correlation among the factors may bias the reader
to conclude that strong heterogeneity exists. We there-
fore elected to use promax rotation, which allows the
factors to be correlated.

In fact,

the results do point

to a considerable
degree of heterogeneity in linguistic deﬁcits, since
the resulting factors are weakly correlated with each
other, in general. These results do not support the exis-
tence of a single severity factor underlying overall
linguistic impairments. Rather, patients vary in their
expression of linguistic impairment in different sub-
domains. Based on existing knowledge of anatomical-
behavioral relationships in PPA, we hypothesize that
heterogeneity among AD patients may ultimately be
accounted for by the variable spread of cortical involve-
ment
that
in the disease. Speciﬁcally, we predict
semantic impairment will be linked to atrophy of
the anterior temporal lobes, and ﬂuency reductions
(reduced speech rate and simpliﬁed syntax, as seen in
logopenic progressive aphasia) will be linked to the left
temporoparietal junction. Deﬁcits in information con-
tent may ultimately be linked to memory impairments,
while acoustic abnormalities are more likely to reﬂect
damage in frontal premotor circuits involved in speech.
Testing of these relationships will require the collection
of large numbers of anatomical images accompanied
by language samples. Although numerous large-scale

K.C. Fraser et al. / Linguistic Features Identify Alzheimer’s

419

longitudinal studies are now underway worldwide
incorporating anatomical imaging, the collection of
spontaneous speech data from the same patients is
still uncommon. Given that language impairments are
potentially informative about the involvement of dis-
tinct brain networks in neurodegenerative disease, we
hope that collection of standardized language samples
will become a more common component of neuropsy-
chological batteries linked to longitudinal anatomical
studies.

Finally, although we have emphasized here the
relationships between language impairments and
structural degeneration in AD, functional impairment
is related to factors beyond cortical atrophy, and may
be amenable to intervention. Therefore, as new inter-
ventions are developed for mitigating the symptoms
of AD, sensitive instruments are needed to evaluate
the effectiveness of such interventions on improving
cognition. Although memory impairment may be the
deﬁnitive symptom for the diagnosis of AD, it is not
necessarily the most sensitive index of cognitive func-
tion and response to intervention. Language function
especially degrades as the disease progresses through
moderate and severe stages [90, 91], and has been
shown to improve in response to successful treatment
with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors [92]. Therefore,
computational analyses of naturalistic language may
ultimately provide a means to monitor changes in
cognitive status over the course of the disease, as well
as responsiveness to interventions, and can thus serve
as a useful clinical tool for purposes well beyond
diagnosis.




